Vector collection documentation [HZAI-77] (#1124)
hazelcast/hz-docs: docs/modules/data-structures/pages/vector-collections.adoc

Conceptually, a vector collection resembles a key-value store. Here, the key is a user-defined unique identifier, and the value is an object containing metadata (user value) alongside several vectors — one for each index.

Users are permitted to store any necessary value for work as metadata (user value). This can be additional characteristics of the source data or even the source data itself.

== Configuration

Collection configuration can be set dynamically during vector collection creation or statically during cluster configuration. Unlike other data structures, the configuration must be set up before the collection can be used. Below is a table listing all available options:

.Collection configuration options
[cols="1,2,1,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Required|Default

|name
|The name of the vector collection.
|Y
|null

|indexes
|Information about indexes configuration
|Y
|null
|===

.Index configuration options
[cols="1,2,1,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Required|Default

|name
|The name of the vector index.

> |`N` - for single-index vector collections. `Y` - for multi-index collection

Reviewer: use yes/no, or required/optional instead of 1-letter shortcuts

Author: 7e1b5c3452fd6c95ac9cd6d02014415617138c44

|null

|dimension
|Vectors dimension
|Y

> |null

Reviewer: currently the default value is 0 (which is nonsense) and we do not validate if `dimension` is positive (we validate some other options). We could fix that in the code. 
In the documentation we should write that the default is not available (N/A) instead of documenting an invalid one. Same for `metric`

Author: 7e1b5c3452fd6c95ac9cd6d02014415617138c44

|metric
|Distance metric used to calculate the distance between two vectors.
See table <<available-metrics, Available distance metrics.>>
|Y
|null

|max-degree
|The maximum number of neighbors per node is calculated as max-degree * 2
|Y
|16

|ef-construction
|The size of the search queue to use when finding nearest neighbors.
|Y
|100

|use-deduplication
|The option for vector deduplication.

> When disabled, a new node will be created for each vector, even if it is the same as an existing one.

Reviewer: I think that this description may be hard to understand, "node" is not defined in the docs.
we should add more info about pros and cons of using and not using deduplication. I can draft a section about it.

Author: 7e1b5c3452fd6c95ac9cd6d02014415617138c44

Reviewer: important difference is also that without deduplication in some rare cases some vectors may become unreachable. BTW, does `optimize` fix it?

|Y
|true

|===
[#available-metrics]
.Available distance metrics
[cols="2,2,2",options="header"]
|===
|Name|Description| Score definition

|EUCLIDEAN
|euclidean distance
|1 / (1 + squareDistance(v1, v2))

|COSINE
|cosine of the angle between the vectors
|(1 + cos(v1, v2)) / 2

|DOT

> |dot product of the vectors

Reviewer: AFAIU `DOT` gives reasonable results only if all vectors are normalized. If so, that should be mentioned as NOTE or even WARNING

Author: That is not correct. DOT is a perfectly standard metric that can be used with any vector.

Author: The cosine metric is equivalent to the dot metric on normalized vectors, making the cosine metric redundant. However, it is already mentioned and I hope that data scientists understand what the cosine metric is.

|(1 + dotProduct(v1, v2)) / 2
|===

NOTE: The recommended method for computing cosine similarity is to normalize all vectors to unit length and utilize the DOT metric instead.

Configuration example:

[tabs]
====
XML::
+
--
[source,xml]
----
<hazelcast>
    <vector-collection name="vector-collection-name">
        <indexes>
            <index name="index-1">
                <dimension>2</dimension>
                <metric>DOT</metric>
            </index>
            <index name="index-2">
                <dimension>2</dimension>
                <metric>DOT</metric>
                <max-degree>10</max-degree>
                <ef-construction>20</ef-construction>
                <use-deduplication>false</use-deduplication>
            </index>
        </indexes>
    </vector-collection>
</hazelcast>
----
--
YAML::
+
--
[source,yaml]
----
hazelcast:
  vector-collection:
    vector-collection-name:
      indexes:
        - name: index-1
          dimension: 2
          metric: DOT
        - name: index-2
          dimension: 2
          metric: DOT
          max-degree: 10
          ef-construction: 20
          use-deduplication: false
----
--
Java::
+
--

> [source,java]

Reviewer: we should add also Python examples here (similar to other data strucutres). I think we can do that in separate PR. @yuce WDYT?

Reviewer: I added Python examples equivalent to Java code, but we need to improve default index handling. I had to specify `None` or `""` (depending on method) explicitly - this is not nice

                .setMaxDegree(10)
                .setEfConstruction(20)
                .setUseDeduplication(false)
    );
config.addVectorCollectionConfig(collectionConfig);
----
--
====

== Manage collection

=== Get vector collection
To get the collection, use one of the static methods of `VectorCollection`. Both methods will either create a new vector collection or return an existing one corresponding to the requested name.

* Method `getCollection(HazelcastInstance instance, VectorCollectionConfig collectionConfig)`.
** If a collection with the provided name does not exist, a new collection will be created with the given configuration. If the configuration for the collection already exists, the provided configuration should match the one created earlier; otherwise, an error will be thrown.
** If a collection with the same name and configuration already exists, it will be returned.
** If a collection with the same name but a different configuration exists, an error will be thrown.

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
VectorCollection vectorCollection = VectorCollection.getCollection(hazelcastInstance, vectorCollectionConfig);
----
--
====

> * Method `getCollection(HazelcastInstance instance, VectorCollectionConfig collectionConfig)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Method `getCollection(HazelcastInstance instance, Sting collectionName)`.
```

> ** If a collection with the provided name does not exist, the system will create the collection with the configuration created implicitly during static or dynamic configuration of the cluster. If the configuration does not exist, an error will be thrown.

Reviewer: > configuration created implicitly during static or dynamic configuration of the cluster

"implicitly" is misleading. Nothing is implicit, configuration must be explicitly created statically or dynamically.

Author: I mean 'explicitly'
7e1b5c3452fd6c95ac9cd6d02014415617138c44

** If a collection with the provided name exists, it will be returned.

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----

> VectorCollection vectorCollection = VectorCollection.getCollection(hazelcastInstance, collectionName);

Reviewer: this example is too abstract with `collectionName`. I like more the style used e.g. in IMap docs with concrete names, data etc. In concrete example we can also parameterize the generics.

Author: 7e1b5c3452fd6c95ac9cd6d02014415617138c44

----
--
====

=== Optimize collection

An optimization operation may be needed in the following cases:

> * To permanently delete nodes from the graph that were marked for removal.

Reviewer: and vectors - this operation frees memory occupied by vector
BTW, `nodes` is not defined. If we do not expect users to know HNSW-like algoritms, we should define briefly in intro what `node` is, eg. `vector index is a layered graph where each node etc...`

Author: Removed mentions of nodes where possible - 7e1b5c3452fd6c95ac9cd6d02014415617138c44

I plan to include information about algorithms, nodes, and graphs in the overview document, not here.

* After adding a significant number of vectors.
* If some nodes become unreachable and the search results return fewer vectors than expected.

> NOTE: The optimization operation is a time-consuming process, and no mutating operations are allowed during this process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING: The optimization operation is a time-consuming process, and no mutating operations are allowed during this process.
```

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
VectorCollection vectorCollection = VectorCollection.getCollection(hazelcastInstance, collectionName);
CompletionStage<Void> result = vectorCollection.optimizeAsync("index_name");
----
--
====

== Manage data
All methods of `VectorCollection` that work with collection data are asynchronous. The result is returned as a `CompletionStage`. A collection interacts with entries in the form of documents (`VectorDocument`). Each document comprises a value and one or more vectors associated with that value.

=== Create document

> To create a document use statics the methods of `VectorDocument` and `VectorValues` classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a document use the static factory methods of `VectorDocument` and `VectorValues` classes.
```

> Example single index vector collection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example document for single-index vector collection:
```

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
VectorDocument<String> document = VectorDocument.of(
        "document value",
        VectorValues.of(
                new float[]{0.2f, 0.9f, -1.2f}
        )
);
----
--
====

For multi-index collections, specify the names of the indexes to which the vectors belong:
[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
VectorDocument<String> document = VectorDocument.of(
        "some document value",
        VectorValues.of(
                Map.of(
                        "index1", new float[] {1.2f, -0.3f, 2.2f},
                        "index2", new float[] {0.2f, 1.3f, -0.2f}
                )
        )
);
----
--
====

=== Put entries
To put single document to a vector collection, use the method `putAsync`, `putIfAbsent` or `setAsync` of the `VectorCollection` class.
[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----

> VectorCollection<String, String> vectorCollection = VectorCollection.getCollection(hazelcastInstance, collectionName);

Reviewer: if you use one example throughout entire document, you will not have to repeat collection creation
see https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/1124/files#r1632795948

Author: 7e1b5c3452fd6c95ac9cd6d02014415617138c44

----
CompletionStage<SearchResults<String, String>> results = vectorCollection.searchAsync(
        VectorValues.of(new float[] {0, 0}),
        SearchOptions.builder()
            .limit(10)
            .includeVectors()
            .includeValue()
            .build()
);
----
--
====

Example for multi-index vector collection:
[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<SearchResults<String, String>> results = vectorCollection.searchAsync(
        VectorValues.of("index_name", new float[] {0, 0}),
        SearchOptions.builder()
            .limit(10)
            .includeVectors()
            .includeValue()
            .build()
);
----
--
====

=== Similarity search options
Search parameters are passed as an argument `searchOptions` to the searchAsync method.

.Search options
[cols="1,2,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Default

|limit
|How many results should be returned in search result
|`1`

|includeValue
|Include the user value in the search result.
|`N`

|includeVectors
|Include the vectors values in the search result.
|`N`

|hints
|Extra hints for the search.
|`None`

|===

.Available hints
[cols="1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Hint|Description

> |Hints.PARTITION_LIMIT

Reviewer: my idea with hints was that users should use strings not references to contansts, so `Hints` class does not become part of public API and we can remove hints easily if needed. `Hints` is currently an `impl` class for that exact reason

Author: 7e1b5c3452fd6c95ac9cd6d02014415617138c44

|Number of results to fetch from partition.

|Hints.MEMBER_LIMIT
|Number of results to fetch from member in 2-stage search.

|Hints.FORCE_SINGLE_STAGE_SEARCH
|Force use of 1-stage search.

|===

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
var options = SearchOptions.builder()
                .limit(10)
                .includeValue()
                .includeVectors()
                .hint(Hints.PARTITION_LIMIT, 1)
                .build();
----
--
====

=== 1-stage and 2-stage search

> ...

Reviewer: something missing here?

Author: description of 1-stage and 2 stage search

Author: deleted this block

A collection consists of one or more indexes, all sharing a common metadata storage. Each index represents a distinct vector space. Vectors from different indexes are stored independently, and indexes can have different configurations.

Conceptually, a vector collection resembles a key-value store. Here, the key is a user-defined unique identifier, and the value is an object containing metadata (user value) alongside several vectors — one for each index.

Users are permitted to store any necessary value for work as metadata (user value). This can be additional characteristics of the source data or even the source data itself.

== Configuration

Collection configuration can be set dynamically during vector collection creation or statically during cluster configuration. Unlike other data structures, the configuration must be set up before the collection can be used. Below is a table listing all available options:

.Collection configuration options
[cols="1,2,1,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Required|Default

|name
|The name of the vector collection.

> |Y

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`Required`
```

|null

|indexes
|Information about indexes configuration

> |Y

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`Required`
```

|null
|===

.Index configuration options
[cols="1,2,1,1",options="header"]
|===

> |Option|Description|Mandatory|Default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Option|Description|Required|Default
```

Example for single-index vector collection:
[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<SearchResults<String, String>> results = vectorCollection.searchAsync(
        VectorValues.of(new float[] {0f, 0f, 0.2f, -0.3f, 1.2f}),
        SearchOptions.builder()
            .limit(5)
            .includeVectors()
            .includeValue()
            .build()
);
----
--
====

Example for multi-index vector collection:
[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<SearchResults<String, String>> results = vectorCollection.searchAsync(
        VectorValues.of("glove-index", new float[] {0f, 0f, 0.2f, -0.3f, 1.2f}),
        SearchOptions.builder()
            .limit(5)
            .includeVectors()
            .includeValue()
            .build()
);
----
--
====

=== Similarity search options
Search parameters are passed as an argument `searchOptions` to the searchAsync method.

.Search options
[cols="1,2,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Default

|limit
|How many results should be returned in search result
|`1`

|includeValue
|Include the user value in the search result.

> |`N`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`false`
```

|includeVectors
|Include the vectors values in the search result.

> |`N`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`false`
```

A collection consists of one or more indexes, all sharing a common metadata storage. Each index represents a distinct vector space. Vectors from different indexes are stored independently, and indexes can have different configurations.

Conceptually, a vector collection resembles a key-value store. Here, the key is a user-defined unique identifier, and the value is an object containing metadata (user value) alongside several vectors — one for each index.

Users are permitted to store any necessary value for work as metadata (user value). This can be additional characteristics of the source data or even the source data itself.

== Configuration

Collection configuration can be set dynamically during vector collection creation or statically during cluster configuration. Unlike other data structures, the configuration must be set up before the collection can be used. Below is a table listing all available options:

.Collection configuration options
[cols="1,2,1,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Required|Default

|name
|The name of the vector collection.

> |`Required`

Reviewer: rendering as code or ordinary text is inconsistent between different tables. We need to make it consistent (maybe there are some guidelines?): option/hint/method names, required/optional, default values

Reviewer: I think required/optional is rather a text than code, but lets check some guidelines or existing pages

Author: 653f346d2711640a47b0755a7aa6fbf62f4b5d09

looks like different documents used different formatting. 
At this moment only NULL, Numbers, TRUE\FALSE formatted as code.

Hope that @rebekah-lawrence  will help with the correct formatting

Reviewer 2: Until the style guide is agreed and applied throughout, I'm afraid these inconsistencies will remain. I wouldn't worry about it at the moment. Anything that I suggest would still be inconsistent!

I would - personally - render the Option column entries as code; but again, this is not done consistently through the docs, so it is up to you whether to make that change.

|indexes
|Information about indexes configuration
|`Required`
|null
|===

.Index configuration options
[cols="1,2,1,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Required|Default

|name
|The name of the vector index.
|`Required` - for single-index vector collections. `Optional` - for multi-index collection
|null

|dimension
|Vectors dimension
|`Required`
|N/A

|metric
|Distance metric used to calculate the distance between two vectors.
See table <<available-metrics, Available distance metrics.>>
|`Required`
|N/A

|max-degree
|The maximum number of neighbors per node is calculated as max-degree * 2
|`Required`
|16

|ef-construction
|The size of the search queue to use when finding nearest neighbors.
|`Required`
|100

|use-deduplication
|The option for vector deduplication.
When disabled, each added vector will be treated as a distinct vector in the index, even if it is identical to an existing one. When deduplication is enabled, the index consumes less space, but the time required to add a vector increases.
|`Required`
|true

|===
[#available-metrics]
.Available distance metrics
[cols="2,2,2",options="header"]
|===
|Name|Description| Score definition

|EUCLIDEAN
|euclidean distance

> |1 / (1 + squareDistance(v1, v2))

Reviewer: asciidoc supports math (https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/stem/). I wonder if we have it configured, if not this should be code.

Author: 653f346d2711640a47b0755a7aa6fbf62f4b5d09

Reviewer: it does not render correctly in preview

Reviewer: [this](https://gitlab.com/antora/antora/-/issues/580) may be the reason

Author: Looks like this is a limitation of GitHub preview.

Reviewer: I did not mean github preview, I meant https://deploy-preview-1124--hardcore-allen-f5257d.netlify.app/hazelcast/5.5-snapshot/data-structures/vector-collections

Reviewer 2: I cannot see `:stem:` used elsewhere in the doc files; I'd suggest just using code ticks here to be on the safe side.

Author: like this?
10d17719c55c9942a5854e4db64a0bf93ccfcdb7

= Vector Collection
:page-enterprise: true
:page-beta: true

== Intro

The primary object for interacting with the vector storage is a Vector Collection. This collection holds information about the vectors and associated metadata (user value).

A collection consists of one or more indexes, all sharing a common metadata storage. Each index represents a distinct vector space. Vectors from different indexes are stored independently, and indexes can have different configurations.

Conceptually, a vector collection resembles a key-value store. Here, the key is a user-defined unique identifier, and the value is an object containing metadata (user value) alongside several vectors — one for each index.

Users are permitted to store any necessary value for work as metadata (user value). This can be additional characteristics of the source data or even the source data itself.

== Configuration
:stem: latexmath

> Collection configuration can be set dynamically during vector collection creation or statically during cluster configuration. Unlike other data structures, the configuration must be set up before the collection can be used. Below is a table listing all available options:

Reviewer: for other data structures you can use both `default` and `*`, for vector with the implementation according to the TDD `*` will also work (if defined) as default for all vector collections. However, `*` is not pre-defined, which is reasonable and I do not see any problems with implementing wildcard matching.

> Collection configuration can be set dynamically during vector collection creation or statically during cluster configuration. Unlike other data structures, the configuration must be set up before the collection can be used. Below is a table listing all available options:

Author: > currently the code does not perform wildcard-matching. So if a user configures a VectorCollectionConfig with name "vc-*" then vector collection "vc-1" or "vc-2" won't match.

But it works. If the config "vc-*" exists, then we can create collections with names vc-1 and vc-2 that will reuse the vc-* config

> Collection configuration can be set dynamically during vector collection creation or statically during cluster configuration. Unlike other data structures, the configuration must be set up before the collection can be used. Below is a table listing all available options:

Author: info about default config and wildcards:
cadf256ce433c4af7bc8c3ae5286eb8a3b8c328e

> Collection configuration can be set dynamically during vector collection creation or statically during cluster configuration. Unlike other data structures, the configuration must be set up before the collection can be used. Below is a table listing all available options:

Reviewer 3: 🤦  doh, I was looking at `Config#getVectorCollectionConfigOrNull` instead of its overridden version in `DynamicConfigurationAwareConfig`. So apparently wildcards already work.

.Collection configuration options
[cols="1,2,1,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Required|Default

|name
|The name of the vector collection.
|Required
|`NULL`

|indexes
|Information about indexes configuration
|Required
|`NULL`
|===

.Index configuration options
[cols="1,2,1,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Required|Default

|name
|The name of the vector index.

> |Required - for single-index vector collections. `Optional` - for multi-index collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Required - for single-index vector collections. Optional - for multi-index collection
```

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
VectorDocument<String> document1 = VectorDocument.of("{'genre': 'novel', 'year': 1976}", VectorValues.of(new float[] {1.2f, -0.3f, 2.2f, 0.4f, 0.3f}));
VectorDocument<String> document2 = VectorDocument.of("{'genre': 'fiction', 'year': 2022}", VectorValues.of(new float[] {1.2f, -0.3f, 2.2f, 0.4f, 0.3f}));
CompletionStage<Void> result = vectorCollection.putAllAsync(
        Map.of("1", document1, "2", document2)
);
----
--
====

=== Read entries
To get document from a vector collection, use the method `getAsync` of the `VectorCollection` class.

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<VectorDocument<String>> result = vectorCollection.getAsync("1");
----
--
====

=== Update entries
To update single entry in a vector collection, use the method `putAsync` or `setAsync` of the `VectorCollection` class.

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
VectorDocument<String> document = VectorDocument.of("{'genre': 'fiction', 'year': 2022}", VectorValues.of(new float[] {1.2f, -0.3f, 2.2f, 0.4f, 0.3f}));
CompletionStage<Void> result = vectorCollection.setAsync("1", document);
----
--
====

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

NOTE: when you update entry, you have to provide both `VectorDocument` and `VectorValues` even if only one of them is changed for the entry.
```

For similarity search, use the `searchAsync` method of the `VectorCollection`.

In a single index vector collection, specifying the name of the index to search is not required.
However, for a multi-index vector collection, specifying the name of the index to search in is necessary.

Example for single-index vector collection:
[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<SearchResults<String, String>> results = vectorCollection.searchAsync(
        VectorValues.of(new float[] {0f, 0f, 0.2f, -0.3f, 1.2f}),
        SearchOptions.builder()
            .limit(5)
            .includeVectors()
            .includeValue()
            .build()
);
----
--
====

Example for multi-index vector collection:
[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<SearchResults<String, String>> results = vectorCollection.searchAsync(
        VectorValues.of("glove-index", new float[] {0f, 0f, 0.2f, -0.3f, 1.2f}),
        SearchOptions.builder()
            .limit(5)
            .includeVectors()
            .includeValue()
            .build()
);
----
--
====

=== Similarity search options

> Search parameters are passed as an argument `searchOptions` to the searchAsync method.

Reviewer: I think we should document somewhere the impact of partition count:
1. on ingestion: more give better parallelism (up to some point probably around total number of partition threads in the cluster)
2. on search: less gives better performance, impact on quality is complicated, depends on `partitionLimit` - IMO tuning `partitionLimit` is quite important in 5.5 to get reasonable results. WARNING: default 271 partitions may be inefficient for search for moderately large collections.
3. on migration: very big partitions should be avoided (current recommendation is still around 50-100MB/partiion), which gives quicker migration and smaller pressure on heap during migration (especially until chunked migration is implemented) which means that number of partitions should be adjusted to the size of data
4. on other data structures: number of partitions is a cluster-wide setting shared by all data structures. If the needs are vastly different, it might be considered to create separate clusters

Reviewer: I don't think we currently have any specific recommendation regarding partition count and size (except generic 100MB size) except that it should be tuned to given collection size, use, required search latency, recall and updates

Reviewer: i will add it to https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/1134/

|===

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
var options = SearchOptions.builder()
                .limit(10)
                .includeValue()
                .includeVectors()
                .hint("partitionLimit", 1)
                .build();
----
--
====

WARNING: Hints allow fine-tuning some aspects of search execution but are subject to change and may be removed in future versions.

== Manage collection

=== Optimize collection

An optimization operation may be needed in the following cases:

* To permanently delete vectors that were marked for removal.
* After adding a significant number of vectors.
* The collection returns fewer vectors than expected.

WARNING: The optimization operation can be a time-consuming and resource-intensive process, and no mutating operations are allowed during this process.

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<Void> result = vectorCollection.optimizeAsync("glove-index");
----
--
====

=== Clear collection
To remove all vectors and values from the vector collection use the method `clearAsync()`.
[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<Void> result = vectorCollection.clearAsync();
----
--
====

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

== Limitations in beta version

In current version Vector Collection is provided as Beta feature with some limitations, the most significant being:

1. API may be changed in future versions
2. Lack of rolling-upgrade compatibility guarantees for vector collections. It may be required to delete existing vector collections before migrating to future version of Hazelcast
3. Lack of fault tolerance, backups cannot yet be configured. However, data in collections is migrated to other cluster members in case of graceful shutdown and new member joining the cluster, so in case of lack of failures normal cluster maintenance (e.g. rolling restart) is possible without data loss.
4. Only on-heap storage of vector collections is available

```

Point 3 depends on https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast-mono/pull/2218

= Vector Collection
:page-enterprise: true
:page-beta: true

== Intro

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

For further information on the architecture and considerations for the Beta version of the Vector Collection data structure, see xref:data-structures:vector-search-overview.adoc[].

```

Reviewer 2: Added a x-ref to the vector design overview in https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/1134there is a comment in that PR explaining the rational (and why the path is now pointing to data-structures instead of architecture)

A collection consists of one or more indexes, all sharing a common metadata storage. Each index represents a distinct vector space. Vectors from different indexes are stored independently, and indexes can have different configurations.

Conceptually, a vector collection resembles a key-value store. Here, the key is a user-defined unique identifier, and the value is an object containing metadata (user value) alongside several vectors — one for each index.

Users are permitted to store any necessary value for work as metadata (user value). This can be additional characteristics of the source data or even the source data itself.

== Configuration
:stem: latexmath
Collection configuration can be set dynamically during vector collection creation or statically during cluster configuration. Unlike other data structures, the configuration must be set up before the collection can be used.
There is no default configuration for the vector collection. If no matching configuration is found for the specified vector collection, the system will raise an error.

> The configuration supports wildcards. Therefore, to retrieve a VectorCollection, the system will search for an exact match of the requested collection name in the configuration, or it will use a wildcard match from the existing configurations.

Author: in text - vector collection. in code VectorCollection
63f4de8311f0dc4368a63de1cccffee4e6510b12

+
--
[source,python]
----
results = vectorCollection.search_near_vector(
    Vector("", Type.DENSE, [0, 0, 0.2, -0.3, 1.2, -0.5]),
    limit=5,
    include_value=True,
    include_vectors=True,
)
----
--
====

Example for multi-index vector collection:
[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<SearchResults<String, String>> results = vectorCollection.searchAsync(
        VectorValues.of("glove-index", new float[] {0f, 0f, 0.2f, -0.3f, 1.2f, -0.5f}),
        SearchOptions.builder()
            .limit(5)
            .includeVectors()
            .includeValue()
            .build()
);
----
--
Python::
+
--
[source,python]
----
results = vectorCollection.search_near_vector(
    Vector("glove-index", Type.DENSE, [0, 0, 0.2, -0.3, 1.2, -0.5]),
    limit=5,
    include_value=True,
    include_vectors=True,
)
----
--
====

=== Similarity search options
Search parameters are passed as an argument `searchOptions` to the searchAsync method.

.Search options
[cols="1,2,1",options="header"]
|===
|Option|Description|Default

|limit
|How many results should be returned in search result
|`10`

|includeValue
|Include the user value in the search result.
|`FALSE`

|includeVectors

> |Include the vectors values in the search result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Whether to include the vector values in the search result. 
By default, the vector values are not included. To include the vector values, set to `TRUE`
```

|`FALSE`

|hints
|Extra hints for the search.
|`NULL`

|===

.Available hints
[cols="1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Hint|Description

|partitionLimit
|Number of results to fetch from each partition.

|memberLimit

> |Number of results to fetch from member in 2-stage search.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Number of results to fetch from member in two-stage search.
```

|singleStage

> |Force use of 1-stage search.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Force use of single stage search.
```

|===

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
var options = SearchOptions.builder()
                .limit(10)
                .includeValue()
                .includeVectors()
                .hint("partitionLimit", 1)
                .build();
----
--
====

> WARNING: Hints allow fine-tuning some aspects of search execution but are subject to change and may be removed in future versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
INFORMATION: Hints allow fine-tuning for some aspects of search execution but are subject to change and may be removed in future versions.
```

== Manage collection

=== Optimize collection

> 

Reviewer 2: You can optimize a collection to improve performance, or clear a collection to remove all vectors and values.

Author: Sorry, i don't understand the remark

> An optimization operation may be needed in the following cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An optimization operation could be needed in the following cases:
```

* To permanently delete vectors that were marked for removal.
* After adding a significant number of vectors.

> * The collection returns fewer vectors than expected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When the collection returns fewer vectors than expected.
```

WARNING: The optimization operation can be a time-consuming and resource-intensive process, and no mutating operations are allowed during this process.

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<Void> result = vectorCollection.optimizeAsync("glove-index");
----
--
Python::
+
--
[source,python]
----
vectorCollection.optimize("glove-index")
----
--
====

=== Clear collection

> To remove all vectors and values from the vector collection use the method `clearAsync()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To remove all vectors and values from the vector collection use the `clearAsync()` method .
```

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
--
[source,java]
----
CompletionStage<Void> result = vectorCollection.clearAsync();
----
--
Python::
+
--
[source,python]
----
vectorCollection.clear()
----
--
====

== Limitations in beta version

> In current version Vector Collection is provided as Beta feature with some limitations, the most significant being:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As this is a beta version, Vector Collection has some limitations; the most significant of which are as follows:
```

> 1. API may be changed in future versions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The API could change in future versions
```

> 2. Lack of rolling-upgrade compatibility guarantees for vector collections. It may be required to delete existing vector collections before migrating to future version of Hazelcast

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The rolling-upgrade compatibility guarantees do not apply for vector collections. You might need to delete existing vector collections before migrating to a future version of Hazelcast
```

> 3. Lack of fault tolerance, backups cannot yet be configured. However, data in collections is migrated to other cluster members in case of graceful shutdown and new member joining the cluster, so in case of lack of failures normal cluster maintenance (e.g. rolling restart) is possible without data loss.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The lack of fault tolerance, as backups cannot yet be configured. However, data in collections is migrated to other cluster members on graceful shutdown and a new member joining the cluster, which means that normal cluster maintenance (such as a rolling restart) is possible without data loss.
```
